Estimator implementation readability review — 2026-10-07

Baseline: 0a8cbd0384c46359c2939454825dc2f6130ba353
Compiler: released Rumoca 0.10.2; generated float32 C compiled with GCC 15.3.0 -O2.
Independent Modelica check: OpenModelica unstable 2026-07-21, Modelica 3.6.

Changes

ESKF covariance reset and reseeding now expose their matrix blocks directly.
Barometer and optical-flow covariance additions use outer-product expressions.
The UKF covariance and cross-covariance accumulations retain their sequential
sigma-point order while expressing each contribution as a matrix operation.
Sigma-point assembly is one horizontal concatenation.

ESKF prediction admission reuses the existing shared imuSampleFinite function.
Sensor correction functions establish rejection defaults once, then select the
reason or invoke the correction. Unused delayed-state fields and guards that
were always true are removed. Local package names replace redundant fully
qualified names. Loop variables describe axes, components, rows, columns,
sigma points and contraction terms. Historical implementation narratives are
removed from the ESKF equations; their original text remains in the baseline
commit. No new code comments are introduced.

ESKF loop count: 33 -> 21. UKF loop count: 50 -> 29.
ESKF nonblank lines excluding line comments: 3113 -> 2929.
UKF nonblank lines excluding line comments: 1649 -> 1549.
ESKF step: 1121 -> 747 lines. correctLinear: 289 -> 187 lines.

The existing independent root packages and fully qualified public class names
are retained. Sensor dispatch, timestamps, gates, tuning and recovery policies
are unchanged. Compiler-required explicit state constructors, indexed
localErrorVector temporaries and the no-inline gain-projector boundary remain.

Verification

Modelica library structure check passed.
Tests.All assertions passed under OpenModelica, including estimator health,
hardening, sensor correction, correlated-GPS and preintegration regressions.
Native assertion builds use -O0 to avoid expensive optimization of the test
harness; generated flight-code replays and hover tests use -O2.
The standalone log-linear, position-loop, manual-guidance and horizon scripts,
including their expected refusals, and vehicle-boundary translations passed.

The complete tools/ci.py rumoca command passed: Tests.All DAE lowering,
simulation initialization and interface checks, production exports, generated
C UKF hover for raw and preintegrated prediction, and the existing explicit
pin-dependent composed-model diagnostic check.

All 72 production replay CSVs are byte-identical to the baseline captures:
ESKF and UKF; GPS, GPS-denied and GPS loss/return; two motion frequencies;
three random seeds; and both sensor-rate profiles. Every output contains
6001 rows, all values are finite, and generated runtime status is zero.
Positions, velocities, quaternions, validity and fusion flags match exactly.
The corresponding CSV SHA-256 fingerprints are recorded in
estimator-readability-replays.csv. The existing capture-manifest.json records
the underlying matched-comparison captures.

Production replay builds use tools/estimator_comparison/build.py. Build outputs,
replays and detailed compiler logs are under
$HOME/scratch/modelica_models/readability. The replay command is:
  modelica_replay IMU.csv MODEL_INPUT.csv OUTPUT.csv gps|denied|transition
or ukf_replay with the same arguments. Compare OUTPUT.csv byte-for-byte with
the corresponding baseline CSV; fingerprints cover the whole file.

These checks establish behavior preservation for the existing assertions and
captures. They do not prove equivalence for every possible input, nor establish
any new accuracy advantage over PX4 or ArduPilot.
